2675 using codeengine with paketo buildpack for liberty (#2736)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2022-11-11-using-codeengine-with-paketo-buildpack-for-liberty.adoc

---
layout: post
title: "Deploy Java applications to IBM Cloud Code Engine using the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/kevin-ortega
author_github: https://github.com/kevin-ortega
seo-title:  Deploy Java applications to IBM Cloud Code Engine (ICCE) using the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Learn to deploy your applications to ICCE easily with the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty
blog_description: "Learn to deploy your applications to ICCE easily with the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty"
open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg
open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo
---
= Deploy Java applications to IBM Cloud Code Engine using the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty
Kevin Ortega <https://github.com/kevin-ortega>
:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /

> link:https://www.ibm.com/cloud/code-engine[IBM Cloud Code Engine] provides the next level of easy application deployment and mature management of critical business applications in IBM Cloud. Use Code Engine to easily deploy Java applications using the link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2022/04/01/cloud-native-liberty-buildpack.html[Paketo Buildpack for Liberty] with your container images or source code. With the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty you can use Open Liberty or WebSphere Liberty to run your application.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use link:https://www.ibm.com/cloud/code-engine[IBM Cloud Code Engine] to easily deploy Java applications by using the link:https://openliberty.io/blog/2022/04/01/cloud-native-liberty-buildpack.html[Paketo Buildpack for Liberty] with your container images or source code. Code Engine provides the next level of easy application deployment and mature management of critical business applications in IBM Cloud. 
```

> The intent of this blog is not a Code Engine tutorial but to provide instructions on how to use the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty with Code Engine. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This post provides instructions on how to use the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty with Code Engine. To learn more about using Code Engine, see link:https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/codeengine?topic=codeengine-getting-started[Getting started with IBM Cloud Code Engine].

With the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty, you can use Open Liberty or WebSphere Liberty to run your application. 
```

== What do you need?
* An https://www.ibm.com/cloud[IBM Cloud] Account
* Your application source

> To deploy container images you'll also need:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy container images, you'll also need:
```

* The link:https://buildpacks.io/docs/tools/pack/[pack CLI]
* https://www.docker.com/[Docker]
* An externally accessible container registry that can host your images. 

> Details on deploying your application from repository source code from the Code Engine console can be found link:https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/codeengine?topic=codeengine-app-source-code#deploy-app-source-code[here].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For details on deploying your application from repository source code from the Code Engine console, see  link:https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/codeengine?topic=codeengine-app-source-code#deploy-app-source-code[Deploying your app from repository source code from the console].
```

> Details on deploying your application from repository source code with the CLI can be found link:https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/codeengine?topic=codeengine-app-source-code#deploy-app-source-code-cli[here].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For details on deploying your application from repository source code with the CLI, see  link:https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/codeengine?topic=codeengine-app-source-code#deploy-app-source-code-cli[Deploying your app from repository source code with the CLI].
```

== Code Engine build strategies

> Code Engine can build your container from source with link:https://paketo.io[Paketo buildpacks] using the link:https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/codeengine?topic=codeengine-plan-build#build-buildpack-strat[Cloud Native Buildpacks] build strategy. The Paketo Buildpack for Liberty is included in the composite Paketo Buildpack for Java that also includes `tomcat` and `tomee` application servers. Tomcat is the default application server and to use Open Liberty requires a little extra configuration. The application server that the Paketo Buildpack for Java will use is influenced by the environment variable `BP_JAVA_APP_SERVER`.  If undefined, the order of Java application servers in the buildpack dictates which one will be picked. Normally, environment variables are provided to buildpacks using the `--env` parameter on the `pack build` CLI command. Code Engine does not use `pack` so the environment variables have to be provided in a `.buildenv` file in the application's root source directory.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Code Engine can build your container from source with link:https://paketo.io[Paketo buildpacks] using the link:https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/codeengine?topic=codeengine-plan-build#build-buildpack-strat[Cloud Native Buildpacks] build strategy. The Paketo Buildpack for Liberty is included in the composite Paketo Buildpack for Java that also includes `tomcat` and `tomee` application servers. Tomcat is the default application server and to use Open Liberty requires a little extra configuration. 

You can set the application server that the Paketo Buildpack for Java uses by specifying the `BP_JAVA_APP_SERVER` environment variable. If this variable is undefined, the order of Java application servers in the buildpack dictates which one will be picked. Normally, environment variables are provided to buildpacks by using the `--env` parameter on the `pack build` CLI command. However, Code Engine does not use `pack,` so the environment variables must be provided in a `.buildenv` file in the application's root source directory.  
```

== Let's get started

Create the `.buildenv` file in the application's root source directory. At a minimum, `.buildenv` should contain `BP_JAVA_APP_SERVER=liberty` but can contain other environment variables consumed by buildpacks.
```
BP_JAVA_APP_SERVER=liberty
```

> Login to the IBM Cloud console and head to the link:https://cloud.ibm.com/codeengine/overview[Code Engine overview] page.  When building from source, enter the url of the respository hosting your source and press `Start creating  ->`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log in to the IBM Cloud console and head to the link:https://cloud.ibm.com/codeengine/overview[Code Engine overview] page.  When you are building from source, enter the URL of the repository that hosts your source and click **Start creating **.
```

[.img_border_light]
image:/img/blog/code_engine_overview.png[IBM Cloud Code Engine Overview,align="center"]

> On the `Start creating` page it's important to enter `9080` for `Listening port`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the **Start creating** page, you must enter `9080` as the value for `Listening port`.
```

Reviewer: Do we intedn for them to use the sample image? If so, might be helpful to say

"Use the sample image"

or similar so users arent left to wonder what to do with the field

[.img_border_light]
image:img/blog/code_engine_start_creating.png[Start creating,width=70%,align="center"] 

> We recommend setting the minimum number of instances to `1` in the `Runtime settings` section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the **Runtime settings** section, we recommend setting the minimum number of instances to `1`.
```

[.img_border_light]
image:img/blog/code_engine_min_instances.png[Minimum instances,width=70%,align="center"] 

> Press `Specify build details`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Specify build details**. 
```

> In this example, the source root is the `finish` directory and contains the `.buildenv` file. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the source root that contains the`.buildenv` file is the `finish` directory. 
```

[.img_border_light]
image:/img/blog/code_engine_build_details.png[Build details, align="center]
[.img_border_light]
image:/img/blog/code_engine_git_repo.png[Root of the application's source directory,width=70%,align="center]

> Press `Next` and select the `Cloud native buildpack` strategy.  Press `Next`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Next** and select **Cloud Native Buildpack** as the source.  Click **Next**.
```

[.img_border_light]
image:/img/blog/code_engine_build_strategy.png[Build strategy,align="center"]

> Enter the details of where Code Engine will store your image and press `Done`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enter the details of where Code Engine will store your image and click **Done**.
```

Reviewer: will the user know what to enter here?

> Press `Create` to have Code Engine create and deploy your application.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Click **Create** to have Code Engine create and deploy your application.  
```

The `Build step details` output will show the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty contributed to the image.
[.img_border_light]
image:/img/blog/code_engine_build_step_details.png[Build output,align="center"]

Similarly, if you're creating your application from source using the Code Engine CLI you need to specify the `port` and build strategy along with the `.buildenv` file present in the application source root directory:

  $ ibmcloud ce app create --name MYAPPNAME --image REGISTRY/NAMESPACE/REPOSITORY --registry-secret SECRET --build-source . --strategy buildpacks --port 9080

```
[finish (prod=)]$ ls -la
total 24
drwxr-xr-x   7 kevin  staff   224 Oct 28 14:54 .
drwxr-xr-x  12 kevin  staff   384 Oct 19 11:07 ..
-rw-r--r--@  1 kevin  staff    26 Nov  4 12:53 .buildenv
-rw-r--r--   1 kevin  staff   790 Oct 19 11:07 Dockerfile
-rw-r--r--@  1 kevin  staff  4066 Oct 19 11:07 pom.xml
drwxr-xr-x   4 kevin  staff   128 Oct 19 11:07 src
drwxr-xr-x  11 kevin  staff   352 Oct 20 08:53 target
```

.To summarize, two important configuration steps are required to use the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty in Code Engine:

> . Create a `.buildenv` file with `BP_JAVA_APP_SERVER=liberty`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a `.buildenv` file that defines the  `BP_JAVA_APP_SERVER=liberty` environment variable.
```

. Set the listening port to 9080

> = Other configurations using the `.buildenv` file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Other environment variables you can set in the `.buildenv` file
```

> `BP_LIBERTY_INSTALL_TYPE` link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty#install-types[Install type] of Liberty, Open Liberty (ol) or WebSphere Liberty (wlp).  Open Liberty is the default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BP_LIBERTY_INSTALL_TYPE::
Specifies the  link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty#install-types[Install type] of Liberty. Possible values are `ol` (Open Liberty) or  `wlp` (WebSphere Liberty).  Open Liberty is the default.
```

> `BP_LIBERTY_PROFILE` to specify which liberty profile to install. Valid profiles for Open and WebSphere Liberty are documented link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty#profiles[here].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BP_LIBERTY_PROFILE::
Specifies which liberty profile to install. Valid profiles for Open and WebSphere Liberty are documented link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty#profiles[in the buildpacks documentation].
```

> `BP_LIBERTY_FEATURES` a space separated list of Liberty features to be installed with the Liberty runtime. Supports any valid Liberty feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BP_LIBERTY_FEATURES::
Specifies a space-separated list of Liberty features to be installed with the Liberty runtime. Supports any valid Liberty feature.
```

== Taking full advantage of all what the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty has to offer

> Code Engine doesn't use the `pack build` CLI to create container images. It plugs into the cloud native buildpack's lifecycle natively. As a result, some features of the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty are not easily available to Code Engine. Features like link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty/blob/main/docs/installing-ifixes.md[installing iFixes] and link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty#using-custom-features[custom features], and installing from a link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty#building-from-a-packaged-server[packaged server] or link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty#building-from-a-liberty-server[server directory] can't be utilized using Code Engine to create the container image. For these features, you can use the `pack build` CLI to create the container image, push the image to an external container registry and use Code Engine to deploy and manage your container by pulling your container image from the container registry from the Code Engine console or CLI.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Code Engine doesn't use the `pack build` CLI to create container images. It plugs into the cloud native buildpack's lifecycle natively. As a result, some features of the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty are not easily available to Code Engine. Features like link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty/blob/main/docs/installing-ifixes.md[installing iFixes], link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty#using-custom-features[custom features], and installing from a link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty#building-from-a-packaged-server[packaged server] or link:https://github.com/paketo-buildpacks/liberty#building-from-a-liberty-server[server directory] aren't available when you use Code Engine to create the container image. 

For these features, you can use the `pack build` CLI to create the container image, push the image to an external container registry. Then, use Code Engine to deploy and manage your container by pulling your container image from the container registry from the Code Engine console or CLI.  
```

> link:https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/codeengine?topic=codeengine-deploy-app-crimage[Follow these instructions] to deploy applications from the IBM Cloud Container Registry. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
link:https://cloud.ibm.com/docs/codeengine?topic=codeengine-deploy-app-crimage[Follow these instructions] to deploy applications from the IBM Cloud Container Registry with Code Engine. 
```

---
layout: post
title: "Deploy Java applications to IBM Cloud Code Engine using the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty"
# Do NOT change the categories section
categories: blog
author_picture: https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/kevin-ortega
author_github: https://github.com/kevin-ortega
seo-title:  Deploy Java applications to IBM Cloud Code Engine (ICCE) using the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty - OpenLiberty.io
seo-description: Learn to deploy your applications to ICCE easily with the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty
blog_description: "Learn to deploy your applications to ICCE easily with the Paketo Buildpack for Liberty"

> open-graph-image: https://openliberty.io/img/twitter_card.jpg

Reviewer: ```suggestion
open-graph-image:https://openliberty.io/img/blog/code_engine_build_step_details.png
```

> open-graph-image-alt: Open Liberty Logo

Reviewer: ```suggestion
open-graph-image-alt: screen capture of Code Engine build details
```

== Let's get started

Create the `.buildenv` file in the application's root source directory. At a minimum, `.buildenv` should contain `BP_JAVA_APP_SERVER=liberty` but can contain other environment variables consumed by buildpacks.
```
BP_JAVA_APP_SERVER=liberty
```

Log in to the IBM Cloud console and head to the link:https://cloud.ibm.com/codeengine/overview[Code Engine overview] page.  When you are building from source, enter the URL of the repository that hosts your source and click **Start creating **.
[.img_border_light]
image:/img/blog/code_engine_overview.png[IBM Cloud Code Engine Overview,align="center"]

On the **Start creating** page, you must enter `9080` as the value for `Listening port`.
[.img_border_light]
image:img/blog/code_engine_start_creating.png[Start creating,width=70%,align="center"] 

In the **Runtime settings** section, we recommend setting the minimum number of instances to `1`.
[.img_border_light]
image:img/blog/code_engine_min_instances.png[Minimum instances,width=70%,align="center"] 

Click **Specify build details**. 

> In this example, the source root that contains the`.buildenv` file is the `finish` directory. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, the source root that contains the `.buildenv` file is the `finish` directory. 
```
